Foundational Mathematics of Artificial Intelligence - AS 110.110
Course Project
Students will work in groups of size 3-5.
Project Overview
The Course Project provides students with experience in designing machine learning
models to achieve certain tasks with a given dataset. Groups will describe the
dataset of interest, the problem/task of interest, their modeling approach, the
models estimated, the forecasts/predictions (with associated error), and the
implications of their findings in a clear, concise, and convincing manner.
The major deliverable in this project is the Final Project Presentation of the group’s
data analysis and models. This presentation occurs during the last class period and
carries 80% of the assignment weight.
There is an intermediate Data Visualization Presentation delivered to the class
halfway through the project with 20% weight.
The instructor will provide a set of approved datasets for the project, and student groups
may choose one of these data sets as the focus of their project. If a group strongly
prefers to use a different dataset, they may do so with instructor approval. Each group
must choose a different dataset for analysis.
Groups demonstrate quality in the project by their ability to:
● Describe the relevant problem/task of interest. For example, this could be a
forecasting, classification or clustering task.
● Prepare, describe and visualize data effectively.
● Design/create and train a relevant model to achieve their desired task.
● Evaluate model quality and provide forecasts/predictions.
● Deliver an effective summary of the implications of their findings.
The above items are demonstrated in a clear, concise, and professional presentation,
and through the submission of supporting documentation.
The instructor will provide a rubric to the student groups for both presentations. In
general, all members of a group receive the same score based on the assessments
conducted via the rubrics. The instructor reserves the right to adjust any individual
student’s grade by any amount based on their individual contribution to the project.
Data Visualization Presentation
The purpose of the Visualization Presentation is for each group to provide data-driven
insight with respect to the project objectives. Groups will have 5-6 minutes to provide
this presentation to the class.
A high-quality set of visualizations provides clarity and understanding into the dataset.
Groups should seek to balance the complexity present in the data with clear, visual,
descriptive display that will guide the upcoming modeling processes. The target is to
provide 2 to 4 valuable insights via the visual display of data.
The Data Visualization Presentation should provide:
● Brief project context including the key objectives (1 slide)
● Insights assimilated so far with respect to the data (2-4 slides). These
should include:
○ Visual description of the dependent/response variable.
○ Display of key variable relationships.
○ Each visualization should include the purpose and be clearly aligned
with the project objective.
● A concise summary, at the end, of the descriptive statistical findings so far and
goals for group moving forward (1-2 slides)
This presentation demonstrates the group’s understanding of the goals of the project. It
forms the basis for the modeling exercise that follows.
Final Project Presentation
Student groups will have 10-12 minutes to present their project analysis and
findings via a presentation to the class.
In the project presentation, groups should clearly explain their model, analyses
performed and conclusions reached in their analyses. A sample outline for the
presentation along with examples of questions to address include:
1. Purpose:
● What makes this an interesting or relevant problem/task to study given the
dataset at hand?
● What is the key forecasting/prediction question?
● Who benefits from eventual findings for your chosen problem?
2. Process and Descriptive Statistics:
● Where did the data set come from? What was the sample size?
● What is the dependent variable? What are the variables?
● What does the data look like (descriptive analytics)?
● What kind of cleaning/pre-processing did the group engage in?
● Which statistical techniques did the group choose?
● Why were these modeling techniques employed?
3. Results from Analytical Analysis:
● What is the most relevant/interesting model built by the group? Groups could
show two chosen models to address the task at hand, but the
recommendation is against three or more as this will overwhelm the audience,
and they will become lost.
● What variables are significant?
● What discoveries or insights resulted from the analysis?
● What do the results mean (in human terms)?
● Are the results intuitive or surprising?
● Are there general or larger conclusions from the research?
4. Forecasts/Predictions
● Provide at least one forecast/prediction using a model built in the project
● What is the associated forecasting error, or limitations of the model
you’ve used?
● How does the model perform, that is, how confident is the group in the
forecasts?
● What considerations might explain the quality of forecasts?
5. Conclusion:
● What was the project’s purpose?
● What were the key findings?
● What are the practical implications of the conclusions?
● Would additional data/variables have aided the research?
● What are the lessons learned more generally from the work performed in the
project?
Of course, you do not have to address all the points above, they merely serve as
questions to guide you through the project.
General Guidelines for Documents/Presentations
● Focus on delivering a professional level presentation.
● Ensure all terminology is well-defined and clear; Keep acronyms to a minimum
or do not use them at all; Do not use “buzz” words.
● When presenting, provide enough information so that one can understand the
quality of the model and the importance of the key variables. Graphics produced
by statistical software are fine assuming that the graph or chart legends are
readable.
● Keep text to a minimum in presentations – use tables, charts, section titles,
bulleted lists, etc.
● Do not read slides when making a presentation. Also, do not read a script.
Practice and prepare to deliver confidently without either prompt.
● Demonstrate energy and interest in any presentations delivered.
● Spell and grammar-check any written work.
● Standardize formatting in all documents and submissions. Do not over formatting






Foundational Mathematics of AI - Final Presentation Rubric
Project Group and Topic:
Element Exceeds
Expectations (16)
Meets
Expectations (12)
Context,
Question,
and
Hypothesis
- Clearly delineates project value for the
“client”/“user”/“beneficiary”
- Provides useful educational
background
- Identifies project purpose
- Provides project context
- Provides intuition
Research
Method and
Descriptive
Statistics
- Summarizes data clearly with
scales/units, especially dependent
variable
- Describes data
acquisition/manipulation
- Describes and justifies research
process used
- Provides useful descriptive statistics
- Summarizes the data
- Describes data source
- Describes research methods utilized
- Provides descriptive statistics
Analytical
Analysis and
Results
- Describes impactful statistical results
succinctly and insightfully without
excessive statistical jargon
- Extends methods covered in the course
- Presents project results perhaps too
many or too few
- Incorporates methods and techniques
covered in the course
Forecasts
and
Implications
- Provides and evaluates one relevant
forecast or prediction using models
described earlier
- Summarize project findings and the
broader implications for “client”
- Discusses lessons learned useful for
class colleagues
- Provides a forecast or prediction with
error
- Summarizes the project outcomes
- Discusses lessons learned
Presentation
Delivery and
Media
- Engaging and cohesive learning
experience
- Improvises delivery with media that
supports content well
- Clear, relevant, stimulating,
professional, and accessible media
content
- Presentation is well organized
- Speakers appear knowledgeable with
respect to content presented
- Effective media for assimilation of
content
Fails to Meet
Expectations (8)
Points
- Lacks effective motivation and/or value
for project
- Missing/limited relevant project context
- Data not well enough described to
understand
- Source of data not provided
- Methods of analysis and/or reasoning
for their use not clear or missing
- Descriptive statistics confusing or
missing
- Does not presents statistical results,
mis-presents statistical results, or
describes results poorly
- Applies techniques from introductory
course only
- No forecast or prediction provided
- Lacks summary of findings
- No lessons learned provided
- Presentation lacks coherence
- Speakers appear to lack preparation
and/or reading slides or notes
- Slides difficult to understand or read